What does it mean to be Laissez-Faire leader?
In French, the term translates to let them do
and that's largely how these leaders operate.
It's a hands-off approach
based on trust, autonomy, and freedom.
So let's take a look at the details of this style
and when it works best.
To start, there are several key features
associated with the Laissez-Faire framework.
First, with little overhead,
policies will be relaxed
and staff can complete their responsibilities
however they see fit.
Second, after goals are communicated,
teams can expect minimal interference
as leaders rarely get involved in day-to-day operations.
Third, people who work for Laissez-Faire leaders
are expected to spot upcoming roadblocks
and solve problems on their own.
And fourth, team members have decision-making freedom.
Employees can create their own processes,
set their own deadlines,
and take action without checking in with others.
Laissez-Faire leaders
flip traditional power dynamics on the head.
They transfer control to their teams and stay out of the way
and that can lead to both benefits and drawbacks.
As a benefit, you can expect faster decision making
because staff are free to move forward
immediately after deciding on an action plan.
Second, you'll note that the freedom and independence
which accompany a Laissez-Faire style
can increase job satisfaction.
Employees can work however they feel most comfortable
and that improves morale.
And a third benefit is improved creativity and innovation.
Rather than operating under a single vision,
staff members are free to think differently.
They have the space to come up with their own solutions
and that improves the potential for innovation.
Of course, a lack of managerial control
can also lead to drawbacks.
When used in the wrong settings,
Laissez-Faire leadership may promote missed deadlines,
poor performance and low accountability.
First, missed deadlines might happen
if your staff struggles with self-discipline
and time management.
With no overhead structure,
these employees may find it challenging to stay on track.
Second, if your team is inexperienced or low skilled,
they may show poor performance
since such employees often require
clear directions and guidance.
And finally, with minimal overhead,
your subordinates may experience low accountability.
Staff members may question
where their responsibilities begin and end.
And they might use those ill-defined roles
as an excuse to avoid responsibility.
So how can you promote the benefits and avoid the drawbacks?
The answer comes down to your environment, goals,
and team's capability.
A Laissez-Faire style thrives in the following situations.
One, your staff must be skilled at self-management.
When group members are self-starters with high motivation,
a Laissez-Faire style can produce excellent results.
Two, your team should be highly knowledgeable.
If you're working with intelligent experts,
it's best to give them the space to work how they see fit
since that freedom allows them to flex their skills
and propel your company forward.
Three, this framework tends to work best
in creative environments.
In such situations,
you want to give employees the time and space
to collect their thoughts, allow them to experiment,
and they'll come up with more creative ideas.
And finally, Laissez-Faire leadership is helpful
if you're working at a fast-moving company
as your team will benefit from being able to pivot quickly.
Plus, if rapid decisions must be made,
the autonomy that comes with this framework
can free up the process.
If you've decided that a Laissez-Faire approach is best,
keep in mind that you can't leave your employees stranded.
You still need to set them up for success.
Make sure staff have the right resources,
training and information to get started.
Then, take a step back, but act as a mentor.
Give the group the freedom to work independently,
but also communicate that you're there to help.
Remember these tips and keep the pros and cons in mind
and a Laissez-Faire style can work great for your business.
Just be sure that you have a talented team of experts
pushing that initiative forward.